# Internet Protocol

- IP is a connectionless & unreliable protocol.
  - Connectionless means that there is no connection establishment between the sender and the receiver before sending the data.
  - Unreliable means that there is no guarantee that the data will be delivered to the receiver.
  - Unreliable suggest there is no error checking and tracking and hence it is a best-effort delivery protocol.
- IP transfers data in the form of packets called IP datagrams, which are independent entities. All the packets are treated independently and are routed independently.
- Due to this independence, the packets may arrive out of order at the destination.
- IP don't have any facility to re-order the packets.

## Supporting Protocols of IP

1. ARP: Address Resolution Protocol
   - It is used to find the MAC address of a host from its IP address.
   - It is a broadcast protocol.
   - Suppose, we know the IP address of a host and we want to send a packet to that host. But, we don't know the MAC address of that host. So, we send a broadcast message to all the hosts in the network asking for the MAC address of the host with the given IP address. The host with the given IP address will reply with its MAC address. Now, we can send the packet to that host.
   - It is a part of the TCP/IP protocol suite.

2. RARP: Reverse Address Resolution Protocol
    - It is used to find the IP address of a host from its MAC address.
    - It is a broadcast protocol.
    - It is a part of the TCP/IP protocol suite.
    - It is not used anymore.
    - It is replaced by BOOTP and DHCP.
    - BOOTP: Bootstrap Protocol
      - It is used to find the IP address of a host from its MAC address.
    - DHCP: Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
      - It is used to find the IP address of a host from its MAC address.
      - It is a broadcast protocol.
      - It is a part of the TCP/IP protocol suite.

3. ICMP: Internet Control Message Protocol
    - It is used to send error messages and operational information indicating success or failure when communicating with another IP address.
    - Whenever a packet is lost or discarded, an ICMP message is sent from the discarding node to the source node of the discarded packet.
    - It is not error dectection or error correction protocol, it is just an error reporting protocol.

4. IGMP: Internet Group Management Protocol
    - It is used to manage IP multicast groups.
